---
title: What is Industry 4.0? Everything You Need to Know in 2026
url: https://www.influxdata.com/blog/industry-4-0-update-2026/
date: '2026-03-13'
author: Company (InfluxData)
feed_url: https://influxdb.com/feed
---
Industry 4.0 is the term used to describe the fourth industrial revolution, a name given to the integration of physical and digital systems, which includes the internet of things (IoT) and artificial intelligence that are transforming a huge number of industries. At a high level, its goal is to create an efficient, automated process for creating products or services that can be adapted quickly and efficiently to changing customer needs. Industry 4.0 also includes concepts such as cloud computing, big data analytics , and machine learning to enable smarter production processes. By using sensors and automation technology, manufacturers can collect real-time data on their machines and operations, which can be analyzed to make more informed decisions about how best to manage resources, optimize production lines, and reduce costs. Industry 4.0 is leading manufacturers away from the traditional linear, push-based approach to production toward a new data-driven, customer-centric model. This “smart” manufacturing can help businesses remain competitive and stay ahead of the curve in terms of production capabilities, while also contributing to a more sustainable future. The path to Industry 4.0 Let’s take a look at how we arrived at Industry 4.0 by looking to the past. This additional context will help give you a better understanding of why Industry 4.0 is important and why so many people think it is valuable to adopt these technologies. First Industrial Revolution The First Industrial Revolution , which took place in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, was characterized by the mechanization of production, the use of steam power, and the development of the factory system. This revolution led to significant changes in manufacturing, transportation, and communication, and had a major impact on society and the economy. Second Industrial Revolution The Second Industrial Revolution took place in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. It was characterized by mass production of goods, the use of electricity, and the development of the assembly line. Third Industrial Revolution The Third Industrial Revolution , also known as the Digital Revolution, took place in the late 20th and early 21st centuries and was characterized by the adoption of computers and automation in manufacturing and other industries. Fourth Industrial Revolution Industry 4.0, also known as the Fourth Industrial Revolution, is the current trend of automation and data exchange in manufacturing technologies, including developments in artificial intelligence, the internet of things (IoT), and cyber-physical systems. It’s seen as the fourth major revolution in manufacturing, following the mechanization of production in the First Industrial Revolution, the mass production of the Second Industrial Revolution, and the introduction of computers and automation in the Third Industrial Revolution. Industry 4.0 key concepts and principles Interoperability Interoperability is a fundamental concept in Industry 4.0, emphasizing seamless communication and data exchange among systems, devices, and software platforms within an industrial environment. As Industry 4.0 relies heavily on integrating diverse technologies such as IoT, AI, and cloud computing, ensuring these components work effectively together is crucial to realizing the full potential of a connected, intelligent manufacturing ecosystem. Interoperability enables businesses to break down silos, streamline processes, and make better-informed decisions, ultimately leading to increased efficiency, productivity, and competitiveness. To achieve interoperability, manufacturers must adopt standardized communication protocols, open architectures, and flexible data formats to facilitate a smooth flow of information across the entire production chain. Virtualization Virtualization is the creation of virtual representations of physical assets, processes, and systems within the industrial environment. By using advanced technologies such as digital twins , simulation software, and augmented reality, virtualization enables manufacturers to test, analyze, and optimize their operations without impacting the actual production process. Virtualization not only allows more efficient planning and decision making but also helps businesses identify potential bottlenecks or issues before they occur, resulting in reduced downtime, lower costs, and enhanced product quality. At the same time, it promotes remote monitoring and control of industrial processes, allowing experts to collaborate and troubleshoot issues from any location, which improves overall operational efficiency. Cyber-Physical Systems Cyber-physical systems (CPS) are a core part of Industry 4.0, representing the seamless integration of computational and physical components. These systems enable real-time communication and data exchange between machines, humans, and digital networks, resulting in smarter, more efficient, and autonomous industrial processes. Decentralization Decentralization involves the shift towards distributed decision-making and autonomous control within industrial systems. In the context of manufacturing, decentralization empowers machines, devices, and production units to make decisions and perform tasks independently, without centralized supervision or control. This approach increases the agility and resilience of manufacturing operations and enables businesses to scale more effectively, as new components or devices can be seamlessly integrated into the existing network. Modularity Modularity, the ability to adjust production lines, processes, and equipment with minimal effort and downtime, is a key concept in Industry 4.0. It emphasizes the importance of designing flexible, scalable, and adaptable systems that can be easily reconfigured or upgraded to meet changing market demands and technological advancements. By embracing modularity, manufacturers can rapidly adapt to fluctuations in product demand, introduce new products, or incorporate emerging technologies, ensuring their operations remain agile and competitive. Modularity also enables greater customization, as production lines can be adjusted to accommodate unique customer requirements or preferences. What technologies are driving Industry 4.0? Internet of Things IoT is an important part of Industry 4.0, enabling businesses to optimize processes and become more efficient. With this technology, companies can deploy intelligent machines to automate processes and workflows, leading to higher accuracy and productivity. IoT technology also makes it possible for machines and databases to communicate, allowing businesses to access real-time data. This improved data collection has enabled insights about productivity and efficiency, streamlining many processes in Industry 4.0. Cloud Computing Cloud computing enables new ways for organizations to develop agile digital operations. By using cloud computing, companies can reduce the time needed to deploy or upgrade applications and further benefit from scalability. With cloud computing, manufacturers now have access to analytics data they did not previously have, enabling them to make informed, real-time decisions. Edge Computing Edge computing is the process of collecting and analyzing data at the edge of a network, closer to where it is generated. It’s at the opposite end of the spectrum from cloud computing, but it’s just as important for Industry 4.0 workloads. This makes it ideal for applications that require real-time analytics, such as autonomous robotic systems and self-driving cars. Edge computing also helps reduce network traffic by minimizing the need to send large amounts of data back and forth between devices and centralized data centers. 5G Networking 5G networks allow for faster communication and data transfer speeds, a huge factor in making Industry 4.0 viable. This ultimately makes the technology more accessible to businesses of all sizes and enables them to deploy IoT solutions at scale. 5G can enable companies to increase operational efficiency by supporting real-time decision-making and remote monitoring capabilities. AI and Machine Learning AI and machine learning are another key piece of making Industry 4.0 possible. Using AI, companies are able to automate processes, improve decision-making, and better analyze data. Many industries are already using AI to increase efficiency, accelerate innovation, and reduce costs. In manufacturing, for example, AI can be used to optimize production lines, predict maintenance needs, and schedule resources more efficiently. Cybersecurity Collecting and analyzing more data is great, but it also opens up numerous potential vulnerabilities for businesses. No company wants to be in the news for leaking internal or customer data, or for not being able to function because critical infrastructure has been hacked. Industry 4.0 requires sophisticated cybersecurity solutions that protect data at rest and in transit, detect malicious activity before it becomes a problem, and alert users when something is amiss. This can be accomplished through various measures such as encryption, intrusion detection systems, two-factor authentication (2FA), and network segmentation. In addition to implementing security solutions, organizations should also develop a comprehensive cybersecurity strategy that covers personnel training and processes for responding to emergency situations. This way, businesses can be more prepared for any potential attacks or data breaches. Digital Twins Digital twins enable engineers to create virtual models of systems and processes that can be used to measure performance, anticipate variation, and even detect defects or dangers before they become issues in the physical world. As a result of this technology’s high accuracy, digital twin simulations can substantially reduce design costs, improve operational efficiency and sustainability, enhance product quality, and promote workplace safety. Furthermore, companies are leveraging the combination of digital twins’ advanced analytics capabilities and connected devices to optimize factory operations through remote commissioning, proactive maintenance, and streamlined troubleshooting. Real-Time Data Analytics Real-time analytics is an essential part of Industry 4.0, enabling businesses to monitor, analyze, and respond to operational and process changes with unprecedented speed and accuracy. By utilizing IoT devices, sensors, and advanced analytics models, manufacturers can collect and process data in real time, allowing them to make data-driven decisions and adjustments on the fly. 3D Printing and Additive Manufacturing 3D printing and additive manufacturing are quickly becoming essential tools for businesses to maximize efficiency, reduce costs, and create complicated designs with ease. For example, factories can print replacement parts on-site without having to call a supplier and wait for them to arrive. This means faster repairs and less downtime overall. Additive manufacturing also allows companies to manufacture complex designs that were previously impossible with traditional manufacturing methods. Robotics In the context of Industry 4.0, robotics goes beyond traditional automation, incorporating advanced capabilities such as AI, machine learning, and sensor integration to create intelligent, adaptive, and versatile machines capable of performing complex tasks with precision and consistency. This also includes collaborative robots, or “cobots,” which are designed to work alongside human operators, enhancing their capabilities and ensuring a safer, more ergonomic work environment. 
By using robotics, manufacturers can automate repetitive tasks, reduce human error, and reduce labor costs, while also enabling greater flexibility and customization in production. Benefits of Industry 4.0 1. Improved productivity One of the primary benefits of Industry 4.0 is improved productivity. Key 4.0 technologies, such as data analytics and machine learning, can be used to identify inefficiencies and optimize production processes. Similarly, robotics and 3D printing can automate tasks, reducing the need for human labor and increasing manufacturing output. 2. Increased efficiency By enabling smarter use of resources and more efficient processes, Industry 4.0 contributes significantly to reducing energy consumption, waste generation, and greenhouse gas emissions. When companies adopt Industry 4.0 technologies, they can actively contribute to global sustainability goals while simultaneously improving their bottom line. Predictive maintenance is a prime example. This proactive approach allows companies to monitor equipment performance in real-time, identify potential issues before they escalate, and schedule maintenance activities based on actual equipment conditions rather than fixed intervals. Predictive maintenance minimizes unexpected downtime and costly repairs, extends equipment lifespan, reduces the need for frequent replacements, and reduces associated environmental impact. As an added bonus, equipment that is properly maintained also tends to run more efficiently in terms of power consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. 3. Improved quality By identifying errors in collected sensor data, Industry 4.0 can also help improve product quality. Additionally, 3D printing can create prototypes that can be tested for quality before mass production begins. 4. Reduced costs The implementation of Industry 4.0 technologies helps minimize expenses because these technologies can help improve productivity and efficiency, leading to reduced labor costs and waste. 5. Increased flexibility Industry 4.0 helps to increase flexibility within manufacturing operations. Technologies such as 3D printing and robotics can be used to create customized products quickly and with minimal human labor. The use of data analytics also helps companies respond to changes in customer demand, scaling production up or down when needed. 6. Enhanced safety Thanks to advances such as robotics and machine learning, dangerous tasks can now be automated. This reduces the risk of worker injury and helps create a safer working environment. 7. More resilient supply chains Adopting many Industry 4.0 technologies can help businesses strengthen their supply chains. By leveraging data analytics, businesses can monitor the production process in real time and detect small issues before they escalate into larger problems. Plus, 3D printing and additive manufacturing can also be used to quickly produce replacement parts or components for machinery with little to no downtime. This helps companies maintain  operations without disruption due to supply chain problems. 8. Improved customer experience Industry 4.0 can help businesses improve their customer experience by providing insights into customer behaviors and preferences. Through data analysis, companies can identify areas where they need to focus their efforts in order to provide the best possible service or product. Data can also help during the manufacturing process to help identify potential defects early, so customers don’t receive a faulty product. Industry 4.0 challenges and risks 1. Implementation costs Implementing Industry 4.0 technologies and practices can be expensive, particularly for smaller businesses. If a business doesn’t have the necessary financial resources to invest in these technologies, it may not see a return on the investment. 2. Cybersecurity risks The integration of advanced technologies and the reliance on connected systems increase the risk of cybersecurity threats. Without robust cybersecurity measures in place, a business may be vulnerable to attacks, which can have serious consequences. 3. Culture challenges Some businesses may be hesitant to adopt new technologies and practices due to concerns about costs and disruptions to their existing operations. If a business isn’t willing to adapt to new technologies and processes, it may struggle to compete with competitors that are more forward-thinking. This can also apply to employees who aren’t familiar with new technologies and may be resistant to change, making it important to ensure that employees at all levels of the company understand how and why changes are being made. Common Industry 4.0 use cases 1. Smart manufacturing Smart manufacturing and smart factories are common Industry 4.0 use cases where adopting new technologies can improve productivity, make products more reliable, and keep workers safer. Beyond the direct benefits to the company, smart manufacturing can benefit the environment by reducing waste and making production more efficient. 2. Agriculture The advantages of incorporating Industry 4.0 in agriculture are substantial. Precision farming techniques, powered by IoT sensors and data analytics, facilitate the targeted application of fertilizers, pesticides, and irrigation, reducing waste and minimizing environmental impact. Robotics and autonomous machinery can also perform repetitive tasks, such as planting, harvesting, and monitoring, improving efficiency and freeing up valuable human resources. Advanced data analysis also enables predictive modeling and forecasting, helping farmers make informed decisions on crop selection, planting schedules, and resource allocation. 3. Healthcare By using IoT devices to collect health data, patients are able to get more personalized and effective healthcare. This can include everything from detecting emergency situations, such as a heart attack, to enabling the detection and mitigation of diseases before they become severe. Robotics is also increasingly used during surgery to reduce human error and improve outcomes. 4. Supply chain management Adopting Industry 4.0 technologies can enhance supply chain management by enabling better visibility, efficiency, and resilience. Connecting components such as suppliers, manufacturers, distributors, and retailers, enables smoother information exchange, ensuring that all stakeholders have access to accurate and up-to-date data. Predictive analytics and machine learning can help forecast demand patterns, optimize inventory levels, and identify potential disruptions, allowing supply chain managers to address issues and minimize risks. Industry 4.0 tools In this section, we’ll examine some tools useful for a variety of tasks involved in adopting industry 4.0 technology. 1. Data storage Storing Industry 4.0 data at scale requires scalable, efficient solutions that can handle the high volume of data generated by interconnected devices and systems. Here are a few different options for storing your data: 2. Time series databases Time series databases (TSDBs) are specifically designed to store time-stamped data from sensors and IoT devices. They offer high write and query performance, making them ideal for handling the high-frequency data typical of Industry 4.0 use cases. An example of a TSDB is InfluxDB . 3. Data historians Data historians are specialized databases for storing and retrieving historical process data from industrial systems. They are optimized for handling time series data and offer capabilities like data compression, aggregation, and real-time querying. An example of a data historian is OSI PI. 4. Columnar databases Columnar databases store data in columns rather than rows, which is well-suited for analytics and processing large datasets and is often used as a data warehouse. Columnar databases offer high query performance and data compression, making them suitable for storing and analyzing the vast amounts of structured data generated by Industry 4.0 systems. 5. Communication protocols Several communication protocols are well-suited for Industry 4.0 systems, providing efficient and reliable data transfer between interconnected devices, machines, and software platforms. Here are some good options for communication protocols in Industry 4.0: 6. MQTT MQTT is a lightweight, publish-subscribe messaging protocol designed for low-bandwidth, high-latency, and unreliable networks. Its low overhead and minimal resource requirements make it ideal for IoT devices and Industry 4.0 applications. MQTT is widely used to connect sensors, actuators, and other devices to cloud platforms, enabling efficient data exchange and remote monitoring. 7. OPC Unified Architecture (OPC UA) OPC UA is a platform-independent, service-oriented architecture developed specifically for industrial automation and communication. It provides secure and reliable data exchange between devices, machines, and software applications, regardless of the underlying platform or programming language. OPC UA supports a wide range of data types and features with built-in security mechanisms, making it a popular choice for Industry 4.0 systems. 8. Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP) AMQP is an open standard, application-layer protocol for message-oriented middleware. It supports flexible messaging patterns and offers reliable, secure communication between devices and applications. AMQP is well-suited to scenarios that require complex routing and guaranteed message delivery, making it a good fit for many Industry 4.0 applications. Data Collection and Integration One of the big challenges for Industry 4.0 is collecting data from a variety of devices that may communicate over different protocols, then sending it to various tools for storage and analysis. Let’s take a look at some options that make collecting and integrating data easier: 1. Node-RED Node-RED is an open-source, flow-based programming tool for wiring together devices, APIs, and online services. It provides a browser-based visual interface for designing and deploying data flows, making it easy to connect and integrate various data sources, such as IoT devices, industrial sensors, and web services. With a large library of prebuilt nodes and support for custom nodes, Node-RED allows users to build complex data pipelines and perform data transformations with minimal coding effort . 2. Telegraf Telegraf is an open source, plugin-driven server agent for collecting and reporting metrics from different data sources. Telegraf supports a wide range of input, output, and processing plugins, allowing it to gather and transmit data from various devices, systems, and APIs to different storage platforms. Its flexibility and extensibility make it suitable for Industry 4.0 applications, where diverse data sources are common. 3. Apache NiFi Apache NiFi is an open source, web-based data integration tool for designing, deploying, and managing data flows. It offers a visual interface for designing data pipelines and supports a wide range of data sources, processors, and sinks. NiFi is particularly well-suited to use cases that require complex data routing, transformation, and enrichment. With built-in security features and support for data provenance, NiFi ensures data integrity and traceability in Industry 4.0 environments. Industry 4.0 best practices Moving towards Industry 4.0 is a major endeavor for existing businesses and involves all areas of a business to work properly. In this section, let’s explore some best practices that can help you avoid major pitfalls that could hurt your business. 1. Have a clear strategy and goals Above all else, you need a clear understanding of how adopting these new technologies will help achieve your business goals. If you can’t actually find concrete ways that this will help your business, don’t blindly invest resources in them. Some potential things to identify: Specific technologies that will be used Which processes could be automated Metrics to measure success Cybersecurity focus The integration of advanced technologies and the reliance on connected systems increase the risk of cybersecurity threats. Implement robust cybersecurity measures to protect against these threats from day one, so you don’t regret it later on. 2. Collaboration Industry 4.0 technologies often involve integrating systems and processes across different organizations. It’s important to collaborate with suppliers and partners to ensure that these systems and processes are integrated effectively. 3. Track results and iterate Establish metrics before starting so you can measure progress against expected results. Based on progress, you need to be willing and able to change your strategy if necessary. FAQs What are the origins of Industry 4.0? Industry 4.0 as a concept dates back to 2006, when the German government laid out a plan to maintain its manufacturing dominance in a paper that looked into the future of manufacturing and how companies would be impacted and need to adapt to emerging technologies. The concept was further refined in 2010 when the German Cabinet laid out their High-Tech Strategy 2020 plan, which defined five priorities that would be used to direct billions of dollars in government investment. How are digital transformation and Industry 4.0 related? Digital transformation and Industry 4.0 are often used interchangeably, but it's crucial to understand their unique characteristics and how they relate to each other. While both concepts involve adopting advanced technologies to improve business operations, Industry 4.0 specifically focuses on the manufacturing sector, whereas digital transformation encompasses a broader range of industries and applications. Digital transformation is the process of integrating digital technologies across a business's customer service, marketing, supply chain management, and internal operations. The goal of digital transformation is to optimize processes, enhance efficiency, and create new business models that drive growth and competitiveness. This transformation is achieved through the implementation of technologies such as cloud computing, data analytics, artificial intelligence, and IoT. Industry 4.0, on the other hand, is a subset of digital transformation that targets the manufacturing industry. It is often referred to as the Fourth Industrial Revolution, representing a new era of intelligent, connected, and autonomous manufacturing systems. Industry 4.0 leverages technologies like IoT, advanced analytics, robotics, and additive manufacturing to optimize production processes, improve product quality, and increase overall efficiency. Despite their differences, digital transformation and Industry 4.0 are closely related, as both aim to drive innovation and create value through the adoption of advanced technologies. In fact, Industry 4.0 can be considered a specific application of digital transformation within the manufacturing sector. As companies embark on their digital transformation journeys, embracing Industry 4.0 principles can provide a solid foundation for growth and success in manufacturing. What is IT/OT convergence? Businesses have traditionally been siloed between information technology (IT) and operational technology (OT). But in recent years, these worlds have started to merge in a process commonly referred to as IT/OT convergence. Better collaboration between IT and OT can add tremendous value to any business by providing greater visibility across the organization, improved data analysis capabilities, fewer manual processes, and a faster response to customer needs. By leveraging both sets of technologies, businesses can gain unprecedented control over their operations. IT/OT convergence involves integrating hardware, software, and networks traditionally used in OT with those used in IT. This integration synchronizes the two disconnected systems, allowing them to exchange data and information. For example, an IT system can enable operators to access real-time operational data from OT systems, such as sensors and actuators. What is Industry 5.0? Industry 5.0 is a term used to describe the next phase of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, characterized by the integration of advanced technologies such as AI, IoT, and quantum computing into manufacturing and other industries. There isn't a universally accepted definition of Industry 5.0, and the concept is still evolving. However, it's generally seen as a continuation of the trend towards increased automation and data exchange that began with Industry 4.0, with a focus on even more advanced technologies and their integration across sectors. One key difference between Industry 4.0 and Industry 5.0 is the focus on sustainability and social responsibility. Industry 5.0 is expected to involve the development of technologies that are more environmentally friendly and that promote social equity. This could include using renewable energy sources and developing technologies to reduce waste and pollution. Overall, the main difference between Industry 4.0 and Industry 5.0 is the level of technological advancement. Industry 5.0 involves the integration of even more advanced technologies, such as quantum computing, which have the potential to significantly impact and transform various industries.
